docs: upgrade guide improvements (#2166)
FusionAuth/fusionauth-site: site/docs/v1/tech/admin-guide/upgrade.adoc

* <<How to Think About Upgrades>>
** <<Update Contents and Notes>>
** <<Testing>>
** <<Downtime and Database Migrations>>
** <<Connected Applications and Client Libraries>>
** <<Skipping Versions>>
** <<Migrating Configuration Between Environments>>
** <<Themes and Customizations>>
* <<Upgrade Options>>
** <<Easiest Route>>
** <<Rolling Upgrade>>
** <<Blue-Green Deployment>>
** <<Out-of-Band Database Upgrades>>
* <<FAQs>>
* <<Detailed Upgrade Instructions>>
** <<Docker>>
** <<Homebrew>>
** <<ZIP Packages>>
** <<Linux Packages>>
** <<FastPath>>

== When to Upgrade

=== Reasons To Upgrade

Upgrading to a newer version of FusionAuth can provide the following benefits:

* Access to new features and improvements.
* Improved performance and stability.
* Critical security updates and patches.

=== Reasons Not To Upgrade

You might want to delay upgrading in the following situations:

* Your current version meets all your requirements.
* You are in the middle of a project or have tight deadlines.
* You have concerns about compatibility with customizations or third-party integrations.

=== Being Aware of Upgrade Options

You can stay informed about new FusionAuth releases and updates by:

> * Monitoring the link:/docs/v1/tech/release-notes[release notes].

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Signing up for link:/docs/v1/tech/admin-guide/releases[release notifications].
* Monitoring the link:/docs/v1/tech/release-notes[release notes].
```

* Following FusionAuth on social media platforms, including https://twitter.com/FusionAuth[Twitter] and https://www.linkedin.com/company/fusionauth[LinkedIn].
* Monitoring the https://github.com/FusionAuth/fusionauth-issues/issues[FusionAuth Issues GitHub repository].

== How to Think About Upgrades

Before upgrading FusionAuth, there are a number of things to consider. Upgrading FusionAuth is similar to upgrading a library your application depends on. Go through each of the points below to see if any of them apply to your situation.

=== Update Contents and Notes

Read the link:/docs/v1/tech/release-notes[release notes]. Release notes help you understand how an update affects you. They include details on new features, improvements, bug fixes, and potential breaking changes.

=== Testing

Before starting the upgrade process on production, test the upgrade in a staging or development environment to identify potential issues. This is particularly important on more complex upgrades involving multiple version jumps or if you have made customizations to FusionAuth.

=== Downtime and Database Migrations

> Plan for any downtime or maintenance windows required for the upgrade. If changes to the database schema are required, this could require more steps and downtime that affects end users. Such changes are always noted in the release notes. (Read the release notes carefully.) A pure application upgrade, on the other hand, may not require any downtime from an end-user perspective.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Plan for any downtime or maintenance windows required for the upgrade. If changes to the database schema are required, this could require more steps and downtime that affects end users. Such changes are always noted in the release notes. (Read the release notes carefully.) An upgrade without a schema change, on the other hand, may not require any downtime from an end-user perspective.
```

FusionAuth can perform database migrations automatically and silently using a process called link:/docs/v1/tech/guides/silent-mode[Silent Mode]. 

If you want to run the migrations interactively, you can run any needed scripts out of band (meaning directly on the database yourself). The general process would be to: 

- Remove all server nodes from a load balancer/proxy.
- Run the database migration scripts.
- Add all server nodes back to the load balancer/proxy.

[NOTE]
====

> You should always back up your database before using Maintenance Mode or performing any database migrations by any method.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You should always back up your database before upgrading. Doing so gives you the ability to roll back.
```

====

> The timing of the database upgrade is also important to note. When an upgraded node is started and connects to the database, it will lock the database immediately if configured for Silent Mode and the database requires upgrading. This means that the database will be unavailable to other nodes in the cluster until the upgrade is complete.

Reviewer: This is the first mention of Silent Mode and might be confusing. Can you talk about modes before this so folks don't get confused? The two modes that need to be covered are silent mode and runtime mode.

=== Connected Applications and Client Libraries

Consider that a FusionAuth server upgrade might mean that you need to upgrade your client libraries too. Check if this is needed before upgrading, as it will entail a more complex upgrade process and may require more downtime.

> In general, client libraries are forward-compatible, but any issues will be noted in the release notes. (Read the release notes carefully.)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In general, client libraries are forward-compatible, but any issues will be noted in the release notes. (Read the release notes carefully.)

If you are using an OIDC compatible library in your application to log your users in, it is unlikely that this integration would require modification. But test it out to make sure.
```

=== Skipping Versions 

> Sometimes, you will want to upgrade to a FusionAuth version that is a few versions newer than your current version. This is called a "version jump". Version jumps include minor versions. FusionAuth migration can run all the necessary database migrations to get you to the latest version. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Sometimes, you will want to upgrade to a FusionAuth version that is a few versions newer than your current version. For example, you might want to upgrade from version 1.43.0 to 1.45.0. This is called a "version jump". Version jumps include minor versions. FusionAuth can run all the necessary database migrations to get you to the latest version, or you can apply the database migrations yourself.
```

> In some cases, version jumps are safe to do. To determine if you can perform a version jump, you should review the link:/docs/v1/tech/release-notes[release notes] carefully. If the releases focus on bug fixes and minor improvements, you can probably perform a version jump safely. Additionally, if the only changes are to features that you are not using, you can probably perform a version jump.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In some cases, version jumps are safe to do. To determine if you can perform a version jump, you should review the link:/docs/v1/tech/release-notes[release notes] carefully. If the releases focus on bug fixes and minor improvements, you can probably perform a version jump safely. Version jumping across patch versions, from 1.43.0 to 1.43.3, for example, is usually safe. Additionally, if the only changes are to features that you are not using, a version jump will work.

```

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The alternative to a version jump is to migrate and test at each version of FusionAuth. For example, if you were moving from 1.43.0 to 1.45.0, you'd upgrade to 1.43.1 and test, then 1.43.2 and test, then 1.43.3 and test, then 1.44.0 and test, then 1.45.0 and test. This is a good option because if there are any issues, you'll be able to know precisely which version of FusionAuth is problematic. It's a great option if you have automated tests that can exercise FusionAuth integrations.

```

> Whichever approach you take, you should always test the upgrade in a staging environment to identify potential issues. This is particularly important on more complex upgrades involving multiple version jumps or if you have made customizations to FusionAuth. We recommend that the staging environment be as close as possible to your production environment. This includes using the same data, or at least the same data volume, as production. This enables you to test both functionality changes and data update performance times before committing to the upgrade on production.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Whichever approach you take, you should always test the upgrade in a staging environment to identify potential issues. This is particularly important on more complex upgrades where you are moving between distant minor versions (from 1.22.0 to 1.43.0, for example) or if you have made customizations to FusionAuth. We recommend that the staging environment be as close as possible to your production environment. This includes using the same data, or at least the same data volume, as production. This enables you to test both functionality changes and data update performance times before committing to the upgrade on production.
```

=== Migrating Configuration Between Environments

There are a number of options for managing the configuration of your FusionAuth instance over time and promoting changes from one environment to another. These include:

> - Script the changes.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Script the changes using a client library.
```

- Terraform.
- Pulumi.
- Manual configuration via the UI.

You can read more in link:/docs/v1/tech/admin-guide/configuration-management[the Configuration Management guide].

=== Themes and Customizations

Review custom themes and how they will be impacted by any FusionAuth updates. If you have made any customizations, you may need to update them to work with the new version of FusionAuth. You can use the https://github.com/FusionAuth/fusionauth-theme-helper[Theme Helper] project to perform diffs on the themes to identify any changes that need to be made.

> include::docs/v1/tech/installation-guide/_theme-upgrade.adoc[]

Reviewer: Can you add this into the themes section: https://fusionauth.io/docs/v1/tech/themes/#upgrading

Reviewer 2: the include is already added to that section so information will update after merge

== Upgrade Options

=== Easiest Route

> The easiest upgrade route is to simply stop all your services, upgrade everything, and then bring it all back online. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The easiest upgrade route is to simply stop all your services, upgrade each FusionAuth instance, and then bring it all back online. 
```

> This is a good option for single-instance development or QA systems, or for systems that can tolerate longer periods of downtime.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This is a good option for single-instance development or QA systems, or for systems that can tolerate longer periods of downtime. For instance, if you know you have near-zero user activity at midnight, you can upgrade then. If you have scheduled downtime for other components of your system, that is a good time to upgrade FusionAuth in this manner.
```

If minimizing downtime is a goal, then rolling upgrades or a blue-green deployment might be more suitable. 

=== Rolling Upgrade

You can perform a rolling upgrade if you have three FusionAuth nodes running behind a load balancer. The nodes are upgraded one at a time and the load balancer is configured to direct traffic to the upgraded nodes as they become available for use. This allows you to upgrade FusionAuth with minimal downtime. 

Because individual nodes are taken offline during the rolling update, the capacity of your installation is reduced during the upgrade.

> You can choose to run in-place upgrades on each node or to replace each node with a new node running the latest version of FusionAuth. In-place upgrades are potentially faster, but if something goes wrong, you may need to roll back the upgrade. Replacing nodes may be slower, but if something goes wrong, you can simply revert to the previous version of FusionAuth by pointing the load balancer to the old nodes.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can choose to run in-place upgrades on each node or to replace each node with a new node running the latest version of FusionAuth. In-place upgrades are simpler and faster because you don't have to spin up a new server, but if something goes wrong, rolling back the upgrade is more complex. Replacing nodes may be slower, but if something goes wrong, you can revert to the previous version of FusionAuth by pointing the load balancer to the old nodes.
```

> A rolling upgrade procedure might look like this:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
An in-place rolling upgrade procedure might look like this:
```

- Stop the first node and remove it from the load balancer.

> - Upgrade FusionAuth on the first node. Once FusionAuth is updated, start it up so that it can perform the database migrations. FusionAuth will lock the database and own it while the database upgrade is completed. Note that there will be a schema mismatch between the first node and the other nodes, so the other nodes may give errors while the first node is being upgraded. The nature of these errors depends on the code paths being updated as well as how users interact with the system. They should be minimal.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Upgrade FusionAuth on the first node. Once FusionAuth is updated, start it up so that it can perform the database migrations. FusionAuth will lock the database and own it while the database upgrade is completed. Note that there will be a schema mismatch between the first node and the other nodes, so the other nodes may give errors while the first node is being upgraded. The nature of these errors depends on the code paths being updated as well as how users interact with the system. For core login functionality, they should be minimal.
```

> - Start the first node and add it back to the load balancer.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Add the first node back to the load balancer.
```

Note that you've already started it up.

- Stop the second and third nodes, remove them from the load balancer, and upgrade them. 
- Start the second and third nodes and add them back to the load balancer.

> There is still some downtime with this procedure, but it is limited to the time it takes to run the database migration on the upgraded first node. There will be limited capacity during the upgrade, especially while the second and third nodes are upgrading, but the system will be available for use for most of the upgrade process.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
There is still downtime with this procedure, but it is limited to the time it takes to run the first node to run the database migration. There will be limited capacity during the upgrade while the second and third nodes are upgrading, but the system will be available for use for most of the upgrade process.
```

++++
{% plantuml source: _diagrams/docs/admin-guide/rolling_upgrade.plantuml, alt: "Rolling upgrade." %}
++++

=== Blue-Green Deployment

A blue-green deployment is a technique that reduces downtime and risk by running two identical environments in parallel. A load balancer is used to direct traffic to one of the environments. Using a blue-green deployment instead of performing a rolling upgrade isolates the upgrade process from the production environment, reducing the impact and risk to the current production environment.

> To perform a blue-green deployment with a three-node cluster, first create three new nodes with the new version of FusionAuth on each of them. Start up one of the new nodes. When the new node starts and connects to the database, it will lock the database and own it while it completes the database upgrade. The original nodes might give errors as they will not have access to the database. These original nodes can be removed. Now add the new nodes to the cluster. The system will be down for the duration of the database upgrade but once the database upgrade is complete, the system will be back online with the upgraded version of FusionAuth on the new nodes. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To perform a blue-green deployment with a three-node cluster, first create three new nodes with the new version of FusionAuth on each of them. Start up one of the new nodes. When the new node starts and connects to the database, it will lock the database and own it while it completes the database upgrade. The original nodes might give errors as they will not have access to the database. These original nodes can be removed from the load balancer. Add the new nodes to the cluster. 

With this approach, the system will be down for the duration of the database upgrade but once the database upgrade is complete, the system will be back online with the upgraded version of FusionAuth on the new nodes. 
```

++++
{% plantuml source: _diagrams/docs/admin-guide/blue_green_upgrade.plantuml, alt: "Blue green deployment." %}
++++
 
=== Out-of-Band Database Upgrades

FusionAuth can handle database migrations automatically using link:/docs/v1/tech/guides/silent-mode[Silent Mode]. FusionAuth can also handle updates interactively on development environments using link:/docs/v1/tech/installation-guide/fusionauth-app#maintenance-mode[Maintenance Mode].

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

[WARNING]
====

> Note that Maintenance Mode should never be used in production.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Maintenance Mode should never be used in production. You don't want your end users to be prompted to update a database, which is what Maintenance Mode does.
```

> You should always back up your database before upgrading regardless of the upgrade method you choose.

Reviewer: Can we put this warning right below `== Upgrade Options` please?

====

> In production, you may want to perform the database upgrade manually, also known as an out-of-band upgrade. This is useful if you want to perform the database upgrade in a way that minimizes downtime or as part of a larger automated or coordinated deployment. Upgrading the database manually involves running SQL scripts directly on your database to update the database schema. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In production, you may want to perform the database upgrade rather than allow FusionAuth to do so. This is also known as an out-of-band upgrade. This is useful if you want to perform the database upgrade in a way that minimizes downtime or as part of a larger automated or coordinated deployment. Upgrading the database involves running SQL scripts to update the database schema. 
```

> Depending on your current version and the new version you will be updating to, you might need to execute one or more SQL scripts to update your database. These scripts are located in the migrations folder in the Database Schema ZIP file, which you can download from the https://fusionauth.io/direct-download[Direct Downloads] page.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Depending on your current version and the new version you will be updating to, you might need to execute one or more SQL scripts to update your database. These scripts are located in the migrations folder in the Database Schema ZIP file, which you can download from the link:/direct-download[Direct Downloads] page.
```

For example, if upgrading from version `1.19.1` to `1.22.0`, run the following SQL migrations in this order:

* `1.20.0.sql`
* `1.21.0.sql`
* `1.22.0.sql`

[source]
----
fusionauth-database-schema/
|-- migrations/
    |--  [mysql | postgresql]/
      |-- 1.1.0.sql
      |-- 1.2.0.sql
      |-- 1.3.0.sql
      |-- 1.3.1.sql
      |-- 1.5.0.sql
      |-- 1.6.0.sql
      |-- 1.7.0.sql
      |-- 1.7.1.sql
      |-- 1.8.0-RC.1.sql
      |-- 1.8.1-RC.1.sql
      |-- 1.11.0.sql
      |-- 1.12.0.sql
      |-- 1.13.0.sql
      |-- 1.14.0.sql
      |-- 1.15.0.sql
      |-- 1.15.3.sql
      |-- 1.16.0-RC.1.sql
      |-- 1.16.0.sql
      |-- 1.17.0.sql
      |-- 1.17.3.sql
      |-- 1.18.0.sql
      |-- 1.18.2.sql
      |-- 1.19.0.sql
      |-- 1.20.0.sql
      |-- 1.21.0.sql
      |-- 1.22.0.sql
      |-- 1.23.0.sql
      |-- 1.25.0.sql
      |-- 1.26.0.sql
      |-- 1.27.0.sql
      |-- 1.28.0.sql
      |-- 1.28.1.sql
      |-- 1.29.1.sql
      |-- 1.30.0.sql
      |-- 1.30.1.sql
      |-- 1.30.2.sql
      |-- 1.32.0.sql
      |-- 1.33.0.sql
      |-- 1.35.0.sql
      |-- 1.36.0.sql
      |-- 1.37.0.sql
      |-- 1.40.1.sql
      |-- 1.41.0.sql
      |-- 1.43.0.sql
      |-- 1.44.0.sql
----

> 

Reviewer: Please add a rollback section. A rollback looks like:

* stop FusionAuth instances
* Restore from the database backup you took
* Stand up FusionAuth at the previous version

Mention the RTO and RPO.

the RPO is the time since the last backup was taken (presumably just before you started the upgrade). The RTO is the time it takes to stand up the older version of FusionAuth and restore the database.

You can also link to our cloud install guide for upgrade rollbacks in Cloud: https://fusionauth.io/docs/v1/tech/installation-guide/cloud#rolling-back-from-a-problematic-upgrade

== FAQs

> Q: What is runtime mode and how does it affect upgrades? +  

Reviewer: Ah, here's the modes stuff I wanted up at the beginning, when I mention that silent mode is brought up in a confusing way.

> A: FusionAuth runtime mode can be either `production` or `development`. When in the `development` runtime mode, Maintenance Mode will interactively assist you to configure the database and connect to Elasticsearch, if configured. Once you move FusionAuth into production, it is recommended that you modify the runtime mode to `production`. When in `production` runtime mode, Maintenance Mode will no longer be available to you, which means you can be certain that your end users will not find themselves on the database upgrade panel during an upgrade. When in `production` mode, you will either need to leverage Silent Mode to automatically apply database migrations or you will need to apply the database migrations yourself (either by hand or via a script of some sort). For more on runtime modes, see the link:/docs/v1/tech/installation-guide/fusionauth-app#runtime-modes[FusionAuth Installation Guide].

Reviewer: Can we have these mode FAQs put into an include and added to the fusionauth-app install guide as well? Seems really useful.

Q: What is Maintenance Mode? +
A: Maintenance Mode is a special admin interface for FusionAuth installations in development environments. Maintenance Mode helps you to interactively upgrade FusionAuth or set up database connections. You can switch to Maintenance Mode by switching to the `development` runtime mode and setting Silent Mode to false. Note that Maintenance Mode should never be used in production.

Q: What is Silent Mode? +
A: link:/docs/v1/tech/guides/silent-mode[Silent Mode] is a feature of FusionAuth that automatically applies database migrations. This is useful for automated deployments. Silent Mode can be enabled in the `development` runtime mode and as of version `1.19.0`, in the `production` runtime mode too. Silent Mode will attempt to perform database migrations on startup. If the database migrations fail, FusionAuth will display an error message on the login page. You should always test your database migrations in a non-production or staging environment before deploying to production.

Q: How many versions can I skip? +
A: We recommended migrating from one minor version to the next. 

Q: How often should I upgrade? +

> A: You can upgrade whenever you want to. It is your dependency and we won't force you. We do recommend staying relatively close to the latest release. In addition, we don't typically backport bug fixes. If you run into an issue with a bug, you'll need to upgrade to get the fix.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A: You can upgrade whenever you want to. It is your dependency and we won't force you. We do recommend staying relatively close to the latest release: within the last three minor versions. In addition, we don't typically backport bug fixes. If you run into an issue with a bug, you'll need to upgrade to get the fix. We recommend you set up a regular cadence of reviewing and upgrading FusionAuth that fits your business needs, the same as you would with a framework or library your application depends on.

```

Q: How can I find out about new releases? +

> A: We publish release notes for every release. You can find them here: link:/docs/v1/tech/release-notes[Release Notes]. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A: We publish release notes for every release. You can find them here: link:/docs/v1/tech/release-notes[Release Notes]. There are a link:/docs/v1/tech/admin-guide/releases[variety of ways to be notified of releases, including an email list and RSS feed].
```

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Q: Does FusionAuth support zero-downtime upgrades? +
A: At this time, it does not when there is a database change. While there are a variety of options that can minimize downtime, upgrades will cause downtime whenever a schema change is required. Please https://github.com/FusionAuth/fusionauth-issues/issues/1240[review and upvote this issue] if zero-downtime upgrades are important to you.
```

== Detailed Upgrade Instructions

This section will guide you with detailed technical instructions on how to upgrade FusionAuth nodes on different platforms.

=== Docker

include::docs/v1/tech/shared/_upgrade-using-docker.adoc[]

=== Homebrew

include::docs/v1/tech/shared/_upgrade-using-brew.adoc[]

[NOTE]
====

> If you want to use manual mode, download the latest version of FusionAuth and follow the instructions below. See https://fusionauth.io/download[Downloads].

Reviewer: what is manual mode? did you mean maintenance mode?

Reviewer 2: removed the note

== Upgrading

If you're considering upgrading FusionAuth to a later version, this document will help you understand the upgrade process and how to plan for it. It also covers detailed instructions on how to upgrade FusionAuth on various platforms and distributions.

Topics covered in this document:

* <<When to Upgrade>>
** <<Reasons to Upgrade>>
** <<Reasons not to Upgrade>>
** <<Being Aware of Upgrade Options>>
* <<How to Think About Upgrades>>
** <<Update Contents and Notes>>
** <<Testing>>
** <<Downtime and Database Migrations>>
** <<Connected Applications and Client Libraries>>
** <<Skipping Versions>>
** <<Migrating Configuration Between Environments>>
** <<Themes and Customizations>>
* <<Upgrade Options>>
** <<Easiest Route>>
** <<Rolling Upgrade>>
** <<Blue-Green Deployment>>
** <<Out-of-Band Database Upgrades>>
* <<FAQs>>
* <<Detailed Upgrade Instructions>>
* <<ZIP Packages>>
* <<Linux Packages>>
** <<Troubleshooting Upgrade with RPMs>>
* <<FastPath>>
* <<Database>>

== When to Upgrade

> === Reasons to Upgrade

Reviewer: ```suggestion
=== Reasons To Upgrade
```

Upgrading to a newer version of FusionAuth can provide the following benefits:

* Access to new features and improvements.
* Improved performance and stability.

> * Critical Security updates and patches.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Critical security updates and patches.
```

> === Reasons not to Upgrade

Reviewer: ```suggestion
=== Reasons Not To Upgrade
```

You might want to delay upgrading in the following situations:

* Your current version meets all your requirements.
* You are in the middle of a project or have tight deadlines.
* You have concerns about compatibility with customizations or third-party integrations.

=== Being Aware of Upgrade Options

You can stay informed about new FusionAuth releases and updates by:

* Monitoring the link:/docs/v1/tech/release-notes[release notes].

> * Joining the https://fusionauth.io/community[FusionAuth Community site] and https://fusionauth.slack.com/join/shared_invite/zt-6ykfov9u-MTwA1A6ptv0Gr6KcFBVG4w#/shared-invite/email[Slack channel].

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Joining the https://fusionauth.io/community[FusionAuth community] forum and/or slack.

* Following FusionAuth on social media platforms, including https://twitter.com/FusionAuth[Twitter] and https://www.linkedin.com/company/fusionauth[LinkedIn].

> * Monitoring the https://github.com/FusionAuth/[FusionAuth GitHub repository].

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Monitoring the https://github.com/FusionAuth/fusionauth-issues/issues[FusionAuth Issues GitHub repository].
```

== How to Think About Upgrades

> Before upgrading FusionAuth, there are a number of things to consider. Go through each of the points below to see if any of them apply to your situation.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Before upgrading FusionAuth, there are a number of things to consider. Upgrading FusionAuth is similar to upgrading a library your application depends on. Go through each of the points below to see if any of them apply to your situation.
```

=== Update Contents and Notes

Read the link:/docs/v1/tech/release-notes[release notes]. Release notes help you understand how an update affects you. They include details on new features, improvements, bug fixes, and potential breaking changes.

=== Testing

Before starting the upgrade process on production, test the upgrade in a staging or development environment to identify potential issues. This is particularly important on more complex upgrades involving multiple version jumps or if you have made customizations to FusionAuth.

=== Downtime and Database Migrations

> Plan for any downtime or maintenance windows required for the upgrade. If changes to the database schema are required, this could require more steps and downtime that affects end users. A pure application upgrade, on the other hand, may only affect admin functionality and not require any downtime from an end-user perspective.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Plan for any downtime or maintenance windows required for the upgrade. If changes to the database schema are required, this could require more steps and downtime that affects end users. Such changes are always noted in the release notes. (Read the release notes carefully.) A pure application upgrade, on the other hand, may not require any downtime from an end-user perspective.
```

FusionAuth can perform database migrations automatically and silently using a process called link:/docs/v1/tech/guides/silent-mode[Silent Mode]. 

> If you want to run the migrations interactively, use link:/docs/v1/tech/installation-guide/fusionauth-app#maintenance-mode[Maintenance Mode], or you can run any needed scripts out of band (meaning directly on the database yourself).

Reviewer: maintenance mode is never used when the runtime mode is production. they could run the migrations by:

* removing all server nodes from a load balancer/proxy
* running the db scripts
* adding all server nodes back to the load balancer/proxy

Reviewer: is this resolved @sixhobbits ?

[NOTE]
====
You should always back up your database before using Maintenance Mode or performing any database migrations by any method.
====

> The timing of the database upgrade is also important to note. When an upgraded node is added to a FusionAuth cluster, it will lock the database and perform the database upgrade if configured for Silent Mode. This means that the database will be unavailable to other nodes in the cluster until the upgrade is complete. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The timing of the database upgrade is also important to note. When an upgraded node is added to a FusionAuth cluster, it will lock the database and perform the database upgrade if configured for Silent Mode and the database requires upgrading. This means that the database will be unavailable to other nodes in the cluster until the upgrade is complete. 
```

=== Connected Applications and Client Libraries

> Consider that a FusionAuth server upgrade might mean that you need to upgrade your client libraries too. Check if this is needed before upgrading, as it will entail a more complex upgrade process and may require more downtime.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Consider that a FusionAuth server upgrade might mean that you need to upgrade your client libraries too. Check if this is needed before upgrading, as it will entail a more complex upgrade process and may require more downtime.

In general, client libraries are forward compatible, but any issues will be noted in the release notes. (Read the release notes carefully.)
```

=== Skipping Versions 

> Sometimes, you will want to upgrade to a FusionAuth version that is a few versions newer than your current version. This is called a "version jump". FusionAuth migration can run all the necessary database migrations to get you to the latest version. However, we recommend that you don't skip minor versions and rather migrate from one minor version to the next, step by step. For example, if you are on version 1.37 and want to get to version 1.43, we recommend that you upgrade each minor step to 1.43.

Reviewer: Can you please use real version numbers?

Also, I'd counsel folks to review the release notes. If the releases focus on SAML or another feature that isn't used, version jumps are okay.

Also, test in staging with real data. Test both for functionality changes and for the time it takes to update your real data.

Reviewer: Is this resolved @sixhobbits ?

If minimizing downtime is a goal, then rolling upgrades or a blue-green deployment might be more suitable. 

=== Rolling Upgrade

You can perform a rolling upgrade if you have three FusionAuth nodes running behind a load balancer. The nodes are upgraded one at a time and the load balancer is configured to direct traffic to the upgraded nodes as they become available for use. This allows you to upgrade FusionAuth with minimal downtime. 

Because individual nodes are taken offline during the rolling update, the capacity of your installation is reduced during the upgrade.

You can choose to run in-place upgrades on each node or to replace each node with a new node running the latest version of FusionAuth. In-place upgrades are potentially faster, but if something goes wrong, you may need to roll back the upgrade. Replacing nodes may be slower, but if something goes wrong, you can simply revert to the previous version of FusionAuth by pointing the load balancer to the old nodes.

A rolling upgrade procedure might look like this:
- Stop the first node and remove it from the load balancer.

> - Upgrade FusionAuth on the first node. Once FusionAuth is updated, start it up so that it can perform the database migrations. FusionAuth will lock the database and own it while the database upgrade is completed. Note that there will be a schema mismatch between the first node and the other nodes, so the other nodes may give errors while the first node is being upgraded.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Upgrade FusionAuth on the first node. Once FusionAuth is updated, start it up so that it can perform the database migrations. FusionAuth will lock the database and own it while the database upgrade is completed. Note that there will be a schema mismatch between the first node and the other nodes, so the other nodes may give errors while the first node is being upgraded. The nature of these errors depend on the code paths being updated as well as how users interact with the system. They should be minimal.
```

- Start the first node and add it back to the load balancer.
- Stop the second and third nodes, remove them from the load balancer, and upgrade them. 
- Start the second and third nodes and add them back to the load balancer.

There is still some downtime with this procedure, but it is limited to the time it takes to run the database migration on the upgraded first node. There will be limited capacity during the upgrade, especially while the second and third nodes are upgrading, but the system will be available for use for most of the upgrade process.

image::admin-guide/upgrade/blue-green.svg[A representation of a Rolling upgrade.,width=600]

=== Blue-Green Deployment

A blue-green deployment is a technique that reduces downtime and risk by running two identical environments in parallel. A load balancer is used to direct traffic to one of the environments. Using a blue-green deployment instead of performing a rolling upgrade isolates the upgrade process from the production environment, reducing the impact and risk to the current production environment.

> To perform a blue-green deployment with a three-node cluster, first create three new nodes. Add one of these nodes to the existing cluster. At this point, the new node will lock the database and own it while it completes the database upgrade. The original nodes might give errors, as they will not have access to the database. They can be removed. The remaining new nodes can then be added to the cluster. The system will be down for the duration of the database upgrade, but once the database upgrade is complete, the system will be back online with the upgraded version of FusionAuth on the new nodes. 

Reviewer: Upgrading nodes lock the database when they are started and connect to the database, not when they are added to the cluster.

Reviewer: Is this resolved @sixhobbits ?

image::admin-guide/upgrade/rolling-upgrade.svg[A representation of a Blue/Green upgrade.,width=600]
 
=== Out-of-Band Database Upgrades

> While FusionAuth can handle database migrations automatically using link:/docs/v1/tech/guides/silent-mode[Silent Mode] or interactively using link:/docs/v1/tech/installation-guide/fusionauth-app#maintenance-mode[Maintenance Mode], you may want to perform the database upgrade yourself. This is useful if you want to perform the database upgrade in a way that minimizes downtime or as part of a larger automated or coordinated deployment. The scripts for the database migrations are available in the FusionAuth upgrade packages. 

Reviewer: maintenance mode should never be used outside of dev environments.

Reviewer: db scripts are available as zip files in fusionauth.io/direct-download

Q: What is Maintenance Mode? +
A: Maintenance Mode is a special admin interface for FusionAuth that helps you to interactively upgrade FusionAuth or set up database connections. You can switch to Maintenance Mode by switching to the `development` runtime mode and setting Silent Mode to false. 

Q: What is Silent Mode? +
A: link:/docs/v1/tech/guides/silent-mode[Silent Mode] is a feature of FusionAuth that automatically applies database migrations. This is useful for automated deployments or for when you want to upgrade FusionAuth without using the Maintenance Mode interface. Silent Mode can be enabled in the `development` runtime mode and as of version `1.19.0`, in `production` runtime mode too. Silent Mode will attempt to perform database migrations on startup. If the database migrations fail, FusionAuth will switch to the manual Maintenance Mode interface.

Q: How many versions can I skip? +

> A: We recommended migrating from one minor version to the next. 

Reviewer: See note above.

Q: How often should I upgrade? +
A: You can upgrade whenever you want to. It is your dependency and we won't force you. We do recommend staying relatively close to the latest release. In addition, we don't typically backport bug fixes. If you run into an issue with a bug, you'll need to upgrade to get the fix.

Q: How can I find out about new releases? +
A: We publish release notes for every release. You can find them here: link:/docs/v1/tech/release-notes[Release Notes]. 

== Detailed Upgrade Instructions

This section will guide you with detailed technical instructions on how to upgrade FusionAuth nodes on different platforms.

[NOTE]
====
*Readme*

> To upgrade to the latest version of FusionAuth using the FastPath installation, go link:/docs/v1/tech/installation-guide/fast-path[here].

Reviewer: Should probably get rid of this, since we advise against using FastPath in prod below.

> To upgrade to the latest version of FusionAuth using Homebrew, go link:/docs/v1/tech/installation-guide/homebrew[here].

Reviewer: Should we extract out the homebrew upgrade instructions to a shared file and include them here and there?

> To upgrade to the latest version of FusionAuth using Docker, go link:/docs/v1/tech/installation-guide/docker[here].

Reviewer: Should we extract out the docker upgrade instructions to a shared file and include them here and there?

If you want to use manual mode, download the latest version of FusionAuth and follow the instructions below. See https://fusionauth.io/download[Downloads].
====

> 

Reviewer: Missing cloud update and k8s update.

Reviewer: I think we're okay leaving k8s update off, but can you link to the cloud upgrade section: https://fusionauth.io/docs/v1/tech/installation-guide/cloud#upgrading-a-deployment

sudo systemctl start fusionauth-app
----

==== Troubleshooting Upgrade with RPMs

include::docs/v1/tech/shared/_troubleshooting-uninstall-upgrade-reinstall-rpm.adoc[]

=== FastPath

While FastPath is an option to perform an upgrade, the FastPath process limits the flexibility of the installation in order to get it up and running quickly. We therefore don't recommend you use FastPath install scripts in a production environment.

On Linux in a production environment, use `.deb` or `.rpm` packages. If your production platform is macOS or Windows, please manually manage the upgrade using the `.zip` bundles.

> === Database

Reviewer: Is this duplicative?
